Height sources selection (#2026)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/advanced_config/tuning_the_ecl_ekf.md

### Height

A source of height data - GPS, barometric pressure, range finder, external vision or a combination of those at a minimum rate of 5Hz is required.

If none of the selected measurements are present, the EKF will not start.
When these measurements have been detected, the EKF will initialise the states and complete the tilt and yaw alignment.
When tilt and yaw alignment is complete, the EKF can then transition to other modes of operation enabling use of additional sensor data:

Each height source can be en-/disabled using its dedicated control parameter:
- [GNSS/GPS](#gnss-gps): [EKF2_GPS_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_GPS_CTRL)
- [Barometer](#barometer): [EKF2_BARO_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_BARO_CTRL)
- [Range finder](#range-finder): [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL)
- [External vision](#external-vision-system): Enabled when [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF) is set to "Vision"

> And the reference source of height data (i.e.: in the long term, the height estimate follows the reference) is controlled by the [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF) parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the long term the height estimate follows the "reference source" of height data. 
This reference is defined by the [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF) parameter.
```

For the ECL to accept GNSS data for navigation, certain minimum requirements need to be satisfied over a period of time, defined by [EKF2_REQ_GPS_H](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_REQ_GPS_H) (10 seconds by default).

> Minima are defined in the [EKF2_REQ_\*](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_REQ_EPH) parameters and each check can be en-/disabled using the [EKF2_GPS_CHECK](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_GPS_CHECK) parameter.

Reviewer: Just FYI, this use of \ works and makes sense, but I may well change all of these to use code style - which makes the source clearer and rendering IMO a little nicer.

  If one or more other sources of height are active, the range finder is declared faulty and the estimator continues to estimate its height using the other sensors.
  The measurements might also become consistent again, for example, if the vehicle descends, or if the estimated height drifts to match the measured rangefinder height.
  :::

- The local NED origin will move up and down with ground level.
- Rangefinder performance over uneven surfaces (e.g. trees) can be very poor, resulting in noisy and inconsistent data.
  This again leads to poor altitude hold.

The feature is enabled by setting [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL) to  "Enabled" (2).
To make the range finder the height reference when active, set: [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF) to "Range sensor".

:::tip
To enable the range finder fusion only when the drone is stationary (in order to benefit from a better altitude estimate during takeoff and landing) but not fuse the range finder the rest of the time, use the [conditional mode](#conditional-range-aiding) (1) of [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL).
:::

> - [EKF2_RNG_A_IGATE](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_A_IGATE): Range aid consistency checks "gate" (a measure of the error before range aid is disabled).

Reviewer: @bresch This last point seems a bit odd sitting here at the end.

Author: That was a copy-paste mistake 😨

Range finder distance to ground is used by a single state filter to estimate the vertical position of the terrain relative to the height datum.

The fusion modes of operation are controlled by [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL).
1. [Conditional range aiding](#conditional_range_aid)
1. [Range height fusion](#range_fusion)

For more details about the configuration of height sources, [click here](#height).

<span id="conditional_range_aid"></span>
#### Conditional range aiding

Conditional range finder fusion (a.k.a. *Conditional range aid*) activates the range finder fusion for height estimation during low speed/low altitude operation (in addition to the other active height sources).

> If the range finder is set as the reference height source (using [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF)), the other active height sources such as baro and GNSS altitude will adjust their measurement over time to match the readings of the range finder and when the conditions are not met to start range aiding, a secondary reference is automatically selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the range finder is set as the reference height source (using [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF)), the other active height sources such as baro and GNSS altitude will adjust their measurement to match the readings of the range finder over time. 
When the conditions are not met to start range aiding, a secondary reference is automatically selected.
```

:::note

> Switching between height references causes the absolute altitude estimate to drift over time. If this is unwanted, it is recommended to set the GNSS altitude as the height reference, even when using conditional range aid.

Reviewer: It sounds like a problem - why would it be unwanted/when would you decide this was needed?

```suggestion
Switching between height references causes the absolute altitude estimate to drift over time.
If this is unwanted, it is recommended to set the GNSS altitude as the height reference, even when using conditional range aid.
```

The fusion modes of operation are controlled by [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL).
1. [Conditional range aiding](#conditional_range_aid)
1. [Range height fusion](#range_fusion)

For more details about the configuration of height sources, [click here](#height).

<span id="conditional_range_aid"></span>
#### Conditional range aiding

Conditional range finder fusion (a.k.a. *Conditional range aid*) activates the range finder fusion for height estimation during low speed/low altitude operation (in addition to the other active height sources).
If the range finder is set as the reference height source (using [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF)), the other active height sources such as baro and GNSS altitude will adjust their measurement to match the readings of the range finder over time. 
When the conditions are not met to start range aiding, a secondary reference is automatically selected.

:::note
Switching between height references causes the absolute altitude estimate to drift over time.

> If this is unwanted, it is recommended to set the GNSS altitude as the height reference, even when using conditional range aid.

Author: Sometimes you don't really care about the absolute altitude; for example if you only fly in position mode or that you're flying indoor and want to have the floor as the height datum

  After 5 seconds of inconsistent data if the distance sensor is the active source oh height data, the estimator resets the height state to match the current distance sensor data. If one or more other sources of height are active, the range finder is declared faulty and the estimator continues to estimate its height using the other sensors.
  The measurements might also become consistent again, for example, if the vehicle descends, or if the estimated height drifts to match the measured rangefinder height.
  :::
- The local NED origin will move up and down with ground level.
- Rangefinder performance over uneven surfaces (e.g. trees) can be very poor, resulting in noisy and inconsistent data.
  This again leads to poor altitude hold.

The feature is enabled by setting [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL) to  "Enabled" (2).
To make the range finder the height reference when active, set: [EKF2_HGT_REF](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_HGT_REF) to "Range sensor".

:::tip

> To enable the range finder fusion only when the drone is stationary in order to benefit from a better altitude estimate during takeoff and landing but not fuse the range finder the rest of the time, use the [conditional mode](#conditional_range_aid) (1) of [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable the range finder fusion only when the drone is stationary (in order to benefit from a better altitude estimate during takeoff and landing) but not fuse the range finder the rest of the time, use the [conditional mode](#conditional_range_aid) (1) of [EKF2_RNG_CTRL](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_RNG_CTRL).
```

* Bit position 1 in the [EKF2_AID_MASK](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_AID_MASK) parameter is true.
* The quality metric returned by the flow sensor is greater than the minimum requirement set by the [EKF2_OF_QMIN](../advanced_config/parameter_reference.md#EKF2_OF_QMIN) parameter.

> <span id="ekf2_extvis"></span>

Reviewer: FYI, adding spans is something that I'm not trying to avoid unless the heading names is huge. Reason being that vuepress links end up below the heading rather than just above.
